15: Honestly it would be awesome to have someone to talk to about this! I feel like I'm such a bother to my family and friends, because no one else is like this. Some may say they are 'scared' of flying, but it's not the same. I guess, like I said earlier, what freaks me out the most is while it is so incredibly rare, it does happen. Like the Ethiopian flight. And I can't imagine what it's like for those people when it's happening. Because I'm sure so many of them knew the statistics too, which made them feel like it could never actually happen to them.

1: Hi guys. So I've flown my whole life. But randomly, around the age of 13, I developed a terrible flying phobia. To the point my whole body goes cold when I'm on a plane, I cry in the airport, and I've even left the airport without getting on my flight. I haven't been on a plane in two years. Well, my parents planned a trip to Yellowstone with me and my boyfriend for August. This trip is very important to them, and I know it'll kill them if I don't go. My boyfriend and I are booked to fly from Charlotte to Chicago, and then Chicago to Bozeman. Both flights are on a Embraer ERJ-175. The Ethiopia plane crash has really made things worse for me. I keep thinking about how so many young, brilliant people were on that flight, and how horrific those 6 minutes of going up and down must've been for them. I think about how I'm sure there were fearful fliers on that flight. Fearful fliers who knew the statistics. 1 in an 11 million chance of a crash, and yet, it still happened to them. THEN, today at work, ( I'm a finance manager for a car dealership), I'm finishing up paperwork on a new truck with some guy. I ask him if he's excited. He says ' yeah, I bought it because we are going to Bozeman in August, and my wife is terrified to fly. So we are gonna drive in this.'... so I'm like, what are the chances we are having this conversation? Is this some weird super natural force telling me not to get on the plane? And I say this as someone who is not religious at all. I really would love some insight on all these issues from a few pilots. Thank you

2: Hello, I'm a pilot. I fly a CRJ-200 which is another regional airliner. You already seem to have an idea of the safety statistics which means your brain knows that flying is incredibly safe. You have to do your best (I know it's not always easy) to keep that at the forefront of your mind. The Ethiopian crash, as well as the Lion Air crash, are disturbing indeed. And I, like you, have spent a lot of time wondering what it must have been like for those passengers as they most likely would have known something was drastically wrong. The important thing to consider about those crashes though, is that once Boeing comes out with a fix for the issues that caused those crashes (which apparently they've already found) is that that plane will be the safest plane to be on. Without a doubt. See the thing about aviation is that although crashes are terrible, each crash that happens causes aviation to be safer. This is because investigators don't just stop once they find a cause for the accident, they don't stop until they find a fix for it. Once they find the main cause of an accident they then go about finding out what caused the cause. Were the pilots tired? Were they overworked? Was maintenance completely correctly on the aircraft? Are they any regulations that need to be looked at that could make things safer? We have a saying in aviation that our regulations were written in blood. It's morbid, but very true. Aviation is safer today than it was before the Ethiopian and Lion Air crashes happened. It's terribly sad that so many people lost their lives but their lives will not be lost in vain. Try to keep in mind that the aircraft involved in those accidents were a new type that hasn't been flying for very long. Somehow, the system that failed managed to get through an insane amount of testing and yet the faults fell through the cracks. This is incredibly rare and now that it's been found, it will be fixed and won't happen again. The plane you'll be flying on, the ERJ-175, has been flying for a number of years and has had no issues. You are going to be just fine. If you have any other questions or comments please feel free to message me. Cheers, Chax

3: Honestly, my biggest fear is how it would feel right before we die in a crash. I hate rollercoasters. I HATE when they drop and how that feels. I think about how, on a plane crash, it would probably feel like that, but times a thousand. I could be totally wrong though. I've been thinking about getting some counseling from Ron Nielsen, he's a pilot that now teaches fearful flier courses. Do you know of him? When I was 14, my parents sent me to a therapist for my fear of flying, but she didn't really seem to know what to do. We only had one meeting, which she told me in it, ' the average crash only last 13 seconds.' Like that is supposed to be comforting or something. 13 seconds would seem like an eternity when you're terrified.

4: So anything else that causes fear/anxiety for you? Falling? Heights? Claustrophobia? Fear of being trapped or restrained? etc. I probably should have included this up front: I'm also a commercial pilot. Have been for 25 years, flying everything from little Cessnas to regional turboprops/jets to the 737NG and 737 Max for a major airline- so if you have specific questions about that, particularly about the 737, feel free to ask. I'm not familiar with the pilot/therapist you mentioned. I've worked with therapists and their fear-of-flying patients in the past, though, so I do have a little bit of background. One therapy session is about as good as zero therapy sessions :) You could very well benefit from a good therapist.

5: I suppose I do have a bit of a fear of heights. My boyfriend and I are both pretty serious hikers/ trail runners/ mountain bikers. We live in the Appalachians. However, I am terrified of getting too close to the edge to look out over cliffs. I start to feel light headed and like I'm going to fall right off. The space inside planes don't bother me. I'm fine with being inside tight spaces. It's really imaging how horrible it would feel while the plane was crashing. Also, the recent crash/fire on a commercial airplane in Russia last month also freaked me out. What did you think of that?

6: Bad circumstances and poor pilot decision-making are apparently to blame for that one. The full report isn't out. That plus the fact that we're talking about Russia, here, means that there may be some gaps between reality and what is reported. But the short of it seems to be that they landed overweight, bounced, and should have gone around, but tried to force a landing anyway, which caused a structural failure and fire. But let's talk about your situation: The EMB-175 is an excellent airplane with an excellent safety record. I love riding on them. IMO the best regional jet ever made. I have a lot of friends who fly it (some of them might be flying you). Your flight will be flown in the US, by competent pilots who've undergone very good training, in the safest airspace pretty much anywhere. It sounds very centrist and sort of politically incorrect to say it: But you kind of have to take note of where all these crashes you've mentioned have happened. They aren't US operated airplanes with US crews, maintained to US standards in US airspace. Say what you will, we have a fantastic safety record here. You'll be flying in the best conditions pretty much anywhere on the planet. The interesting thing about the aviation community is how we tend to respond to an accident. We generally nitpick the thing, examine it clinically, and figure out pretty rapidly how to not have that happen again and fix whatever caused it. And I'll say it again, because you have to sort of put all this into perspective-- the obsession people in general and the media specifically have over plane incidents is really misplaced. There are so many everyday things that are more dangerous than flying, but they don't make spectacular news stories. You kind of have to get yourself into a place where you don't give the drama surrounding an aviation incident much credit or thought, because, in reality, beyond looking really crazy on TV or whatever, there just isn't much to it in the grander scheme of things. Here's a list of really mundane things that are very common ways to croak, but just don't have that news-story pull to make it into 24-hour "look at THIS" cycle-- all of these together kill exponentially more people than plane crashes.

7: This is completely normal and probably the #1 root cause of flying anxiety/fear. Totally understandable, really. You're being sealed up in an aluminum tube where you really don't even understand how the door operates and trusting a crew you've never met or possibly not even seen to take you safely to your destination at incredibly high speed and altitude. You're right to have apprehension-- it's how our species has survived for so long; we're naturally paranoid and don't like to be feel trapped in unfamiliar or potentially dangerous places. All normal. What you have to do is teach your higher-functioning mind to override your more primitive instincts. You do that by learning as much as you can about airplanes, pilots/flight crews, and air travel as you can. The more you know, the less traction your noisy primitive side can gain intrude on your better-reasoning mind. I even recommend that people with flying anxiety try to work out at least a discovery flight with a flight instructor at some point. First thing you need to know and understand is this: If I, as the pilot, get there OK, then clearly you get there OK. I have exactly zero interest in bending the airplane I'm flying or getting hurt by bending the airplane I'm flying. I will use every bit of my experience, training and skill to avoid those situations. I don't take chances with my airplane or crew, and I've been flying for 25 years with closing in on 20,000 hours of total flight time. If I'm OK, you're definitely OK. Ask questions. Lots of them. What do you want to know? What happens on flights that you don't understand? Answering these questions gets you moving towards getting over your fear enough to get on with your life.

8: If you're flying on a regional jet like the EMB-175, particularly to a small town like Bozeman, that is never going to be mainline, it's always a regional contractor airline; in this case Skywest. There are about 30 regional airlines in the US that provide feed from smaller cities to the hubs for larger airlines. This is very common since it's not profitable to operate large airplanes into and out of smaller airports where there just isn't enough passenger traffic to justify the expense- so they contract with somewhat smaller airlines who operate smaller jets. 25 years old is pretty average for a regional pilot nowadays. Some of the new pilots there are likely younger than that. I work for a mainline legacy carrier, and even we get new-hire pilots in their 20s. All of these pilots are held to the same training environment and standards, regardless of who they work for. Your pilots, while possibly quite young, have plenty of experience, are very well-trained, and are flying basically brand-new airplanes. Their safety record is excellent. There really isn't a 'main pilot.' We have captains (left seat, pilot-in-command) and first officers (second-in-command). Depending on where they are in their duty day, either of them could be actually flying the jet. We trade off duties every other flight, so if I'm pilot-flying on a leg from Phoenix to San Francisco, for instance, the other pilot is the pilot-monitoring. I physically fly the airplane while the other pilot runs radios, checklists, etc. When we get to SFO, we'll switch duties and the other pilot will be PF and physically fly while I perform pilot-monitoring (PM) duties for the leg back to PHX. It ensures we are always rested, alert, and are getting equal flying experience. The philosophy in the US is that we don't hire co-pilots; we hire people who will make good captains, who have the skills and judgement to sit in that captain seat now, even though they still need to have enough time with the airline before they can actually hold the captain's seat.

9: It fails to address the fact that the number of people flying has also increased. More frequency and volume of travel equals a proportionate (slight) increase in incidents. Did you notice the numbers in the article? 4.3 billion (with a B) people flew as passengers just last year. Less than 600 fatalities out of 4.3 billion people who flew. Your chances of getting struck by lightning are better (1 in 3000 over your lifetime). hell if you're outdoors a lot in the Appalachians, your risk of lighting strike is probably even higher than that average.

10: Thank you for this. Also, a crash that has always terrified me is the AirFrance 447 crash in 2009. I guess what has always really, really bothered me about this one. From what I've gathered from the story, everything on the flight was actually 100% okay. The co-pilot actually created the whole issue himself. It seemed as though he was extremely worried about flying through a storm, and because of this fear, panicked and ultimately caused the crash. This terrifies me. The human factor of flying. How do I know my pilot won't panic and kill us all? Lol. But seriously.

11: That's actually not what happened at all. The problem was unreliable/erroneous airspeed indications caused by faulty pitot tubes (the pitot tubes measure airspeed) that became clogged with ice. The autopilot disengaged and the fly-by-wire flight control system entered alternate-law (which basically means that the airplane handed over all control to the pilots). There was some pilot error involved in that the pilots had difficulty hand-flying the airplane as well as their being unable to diagnose the faulty-airspeed problem. I can see why this one scares you because of your apparent fear of falling. Most likely, the passengers had no idea this was even happening. The airplane wouldn't feel like it was falling out from under you in this situation; everything would still be at 1g. It was basically like a falling leaf. Even the recent Max crashes probably didn't really give much of a "falling" feeling-- it most likely just felt like a rapid descent up till the last moment. The airplanes didn't just drop from the sky, they transitioned into a high-speed dive. Different. But anyway, what I'm picking up on here is some pretty normal fear-of-flying things: Fear of falling in something you can't get out of. Fear of being out of control. Fear of not being able to escape. These are all normal. Hell, I get the same sensations when I'm riding in the back as a passenger, and I know more about what's going on than pretty much every other passenger. I'm not the most comfortable passenger at all, for sure. When I was younger I had a pretty serious fear of flying, even though I did it quite a bit.

12: Human-factor causes/issues are something we, the FAA, the training department, discuss pretty much all the time. I'd say that right now, we know more about human factors in aviation and how to mitigate the risks associated with them than we ever have in the past. I really can't think of a single incident in the whole 25 years or so that I've been flying that can be completely attributable to just simply some pilot panicking/freaking out and crashing.

13: Well first of all, you have to understand flying is just weird and unnatural. Flying high above ground, in enclosed tight space, with insane speeds, what's not there to be afraid of? Well actually next to nothing, but our instincts are often quick to tell us the opposite. It's common thing, chances are there are many people with you on any flight that are afraid or used to be afraid of flying. Yet in the in the end, it's our brains that are just not able to work with statistics very well when it comes to those fears. Chances are you know all about the recent plane crashes that happened worldwide and at the same time, are completely ignorant on all the car crashes, people killed on the streets etc. Do you sometimes walk outside in storm? Well statistically speaking, chances of being struck by lightning (and dying of it) are greater than dying in plane crash. It may be a bit morbid suggestion, but maybe watch some good documents (Mayday / ACI for example) about plane crashes (just preferably older, fully investigated) . You'll learn lots of stuff, how many unlikely things must happen prior to any real emergency (as often said, all accidents in aviation are results of chain of events) and even when those happens as unlikely as they are, that nothing is lost. All fuel lost flying over Atlantic? Plane (civilian, big jetliner) shot with rocket with wing on fire? Broken cockpit window and captain pulled out of the plane? All power lost during most dangerous phase of flight? Yet nobody died and pilots brought the planes back to safety. So, I suggest you talk to your boyfriend, tell him your fears, there isn't anything to be ashamed of, just don't act on them, they're irrational fears. Chances of anything happening on that flight are next to zero, you're much more likely to win lottery big time. And even if something were to happen (chances are next to zero though), you'll be in good hands, with people trained for those situations that will do everything possible (and sometimes even impossible :-D) to bring you back to safety. And remember, when you arrive to the airport by your car / bus / whatever, the most dangerous part of the travel is over, so you may very well relax ;-)

14: 100% not a pilot and never will be, because we are identical in this regard, haha! It's horrible, and to be perfectly honest, I take Ativan, Benadryl, and (when I'm not pregnant), booze. But the Ativan and Benadryl have worked wonderfully. I'm miserable until I take them, I'm still jumpy and anxious, but it takes that awful, awful, edge off. I know some will push back on this, but drastic times call for drastic measures. I know the feelings you're feeling! I also have a background in meteorology so I can decipher upper level atmosphere maps and my friend does turbulence forecasts for me. Are you taking about that 'Fly Home' fear of flying course/therapy? I was thinking about that as well! Let me know if you want to be phobia buddies - for real - no one else understands how I feel and it'd be nice to talk to someone before flights!

16: Yes!! I think about that all the time. For whatever reason the Air France one a few years ago has really gotten to me. There were definitely people like us on these flights. Sometimes I think my anxiety and fear is almost protective In a way. I also used to think, before I became really anxious, that there is no way the plane could crash with babies and little kids on board. Definitely not true, of course. I'm absolutely rotten to my my husband mainly before flying. No one gets it. Once you're up in the air, you can't get out of there. I'm not claustrophobic, but on planes I am. I subscribe to the FlightAware newsletter which helps some, as it'll give updates on accident analyses and it helps to see people casually talk about flying like it isn't any big thing. FlightAware the app is like my talisman as well. You can just track your flight the whole time you're on it (for when you're not on a JetBlue or similar where they have the TVs that do that for you). Sorry this is so rambling! PM me anytime and I'm happy to commiserate!

17: I'm writing this 36,000ft above the coast of Albania. My stomach is an icy mass, I want to cry, and an ache that begins in my thighs intensifies down my legs, reaching a soggy apogee in the soles of my feet, where the nerve endings are continuously, painfully primed for landing. I'm on a plane for the fourth time in six weeks, and I'm scared of flying. Facing my fear: I was scared of flying. Then my plane nearly crashed I know many want to help, so let me start by saying: for me, at least, the statistics don't make me feel better. It's the safest form of travel! You're more likely to be harmed in the taxi on the way there; you're more likely to die in your own bathtub; you're more likely to brain yourself on the front doorstep after slipping on a slug. I don't dispute the facts, although I haven't checked the bathtub one (I daren't turn on the wifi). One of my uncles died of the head injuries he incurred slipping on a slug while drunk, and I've never known anyone who's been involved in an air crash, so I'm sold in terms of both anecdote and data on the statistical safety of flying. It's just that it doesn't stop me wanting to run screaming from the departure lounge. People who fly happily think not unreasonably that nothing bad will happen. Those of us who are scared are fixated on the knowledge that it might. There's an egotism here, a deeply skewed belief that the fact of my existence is so significant that it must irresistibly draw down the most numerically unlikely catastrophe. I'm also convinced that the emotional force of my terror is somehow important. If I stop worrying if I read, sleep or listen to Kermode and Mayo, we will fall out of the sky. This applies only to me: other people doing it is fine. Landing in New York, the only long-haul flight I have taken in 30 years, I was completely exhausted by the effort of keeping the plane in the air. Oh, as Dr Seuss nearly said, the places I won't go. Of course, we're not scared of flying: we're scared of crashing. There's nothing irrational about being conscious of your vulnerability when you're cruising some way above the level of the Hillary Step. It's a cocktail of some of the most common fears: falling from a great height, enclosed spaces, having no control. It's also borne of an overactive imagination, of picturing the kind of death it would be, conscious and free-falling. The second worst scenario, for me, involves sliding into uncontrolled panic in front of a baffled audience. On a flight some years ago I saw an elegant young woman roll up her jumper, lay it between her head and the window, and fall asleep before takeoff. This is the kind of traveller I aspire to be, rather than a wet-footed, half-drunk hysteric strung tighter than piano wire. Take off is the worst, but descending is also awful, as the engines suddenly get quieter and your duodenum appears in the back of your throat. It's got worse with age. Among people I know, the brotherhood of the nervous expands each year. A friend who makes a living by writing about foreign cities has to go everywhere by boat or train or car. A corporate lawyer cannot avoid flying, but it makes her miserable. Another friend planning the holiday of a lifetime to Canada sympathises: 'Oh God, I hate it too.' Perhaps it's contagious. On this flight, on take-off, a woman two rows in front of me buried her face in her hands while her husband rubbed her arm; I was torn between wanting to offer solidarity, and wanting to ask her to get a grip, because she was adding an extra level of freak to my already considerable freak levels. I settle for doing neither and instead retreat to pretending that Tom Hanks is on my flight. I do this often, because he is the world's most reassuring presence, and will surely not die on a tourist shuttle from Epirus. But through it all, I know, obscurely, that later on tonight I will be at home, falling asleep to the sound of planes overhead. I grew up under the Heathrow flight path and live beneath it still, near the great reservoirs west of London that mark the way home. Each night I'm lulled by the roar of engines above my head and imagine passengers in the low lights of nighttime cabins, heading to Dublin or Dallas, or Delhi or Dubai; business or pleasure, home or away. And somehow I know that they, like me, will almost certainly have a safe journey.

18: It's all about mindset. Some education about flying is fine, but don't overdo it. Otherwise, you are trapped in the mental exercise of reassurance seeking. That just more anxiety-inducing behavior, not progress. A couple of times I used lorazepam and it helped. But, flying on meds creates side effects and wasted time recovering from drug hangovers. I typically travel with my family and I have responsibilities as a husband and father. I didn't want to be drugged. I wanted to really overcome the fear for myself and my family. My son in particular. I want to travel with him as much as possible as he gets older. right now he's 2.5 yo and a great traveler, so he inspired me as well.  This is something I wrote on Instagram that people liked about grit and a framework of what gave me the best results so I could get on the plane again and again. Why do we need grit when overcoming flight anxiety and fear? ? ? It has been shown that your mood, and attitude to life, will interfere with your ability to stay the course and solve problems.? ? The key is to learn: ? emotion regulation, and? a positive thinking style.? ? In order to achieve the goal of flying with confidence, rather than apprehension, we need to stick at things despite hard times.? ? Sticking with the hard times, emotional regulation, and a positive thinking style! ? ? This is the ready, SET, go! framework of flying like a boss! ? ? S-Stick with hard times.? You may be uncomfortable. You may feel like you have lost control, but you will be ok. The hard times will pass and in place, strength is developed for future events! ?Trust me! ? E-Emotional regulation.? Your emotions will get the best of you and create the illusion of extreme danger! Challenging negative thinking, reframing nervous feelings as excitement, HRV breathing are your tools to regulate your emotional system! ? ? T- Thinking positive.? Imagine a fantastic flight weeks and days until the event. Imagine the great experiences you have to look forward to. Think about past successes. Think about how common flying is and how your flight is just a regular thing that happens day in, day out because of the incredibly robust systems in place to keep you safe. 1,000,000 flights everyday with no issues! You only hear about the minute percentage of events in the news that mess with your thinking. What about all the millions of great flights that happen all the time? ?

19: I have 3 children under 6 so yes, Flying is important to me. Also making my wife happy, in turn, would make me happy. As a dad myself, I had similar feelings. I took Xanax but still felt fine to function.

20: Something interesting you can try is coming up with a very positive, emotionally charged image that creates a burst of oxytocin in your body. I used the memory of my son being born and seeing him for the first time. When I reframed anxiety as excitement I also brought this memory to mind so I got the reframing and the oxytocin. What helped me the most is just sitting with the discomfort. Imagine your body melting the fear, ask for more. Asking to make it stronger confuses the anxiety and turns it down because you are not resisting it. The anticipation is the worse part for some. So, know that you just need to get through the first part and the takeoff. It is challenging flying with kids, so plan everything out as much is possible to lessen your stress load. Keep the meds with you as a comfort , but think what would change about the flight if you took a pill?

21: Visualization is your friend. Go over in your mind everything from arrival at the airport to landing at your destination. Rehearse what you will say, anticipate questions people may ask, know what you will do if you are asked to give upnyour seat due to overbooking, etc. Remember that you don't have to be first in line to board, or the first out of your seat when you land. If you are stressed by crowds stay to the back of the lines and don't rush. Pack lightly and keep what you will need in your carry on. Headphones and your most calming jams will centre you while you are waiting.  Above all, remember you have chosen the safest mode of travel and don't let "what ifs" get you uptight.

22: Download a game to your phone! I flew to Costa Rica in January and was so focused on beating the game that I didn't notice any turbulence or any of the things that would usually make me anxious on a flight.

23: It's a mental game. Fear does not mean danger! If you are feeling anxious before or during the flight, remind yourself that fear does not mean you are in danger It's important to separate your anxiety from danger in these circumstances since your body reacts to both the same. Realize your body is doing its job by trying to keep you from a perceived threat that's not really dangerous.

24: Exactly! What I learned from this applies to mindset in any area that creates a fear response. Stay in the present. Do HRV breathing reframe anxiety as excitement. Literally say to yourself that you're excited each time. Go over my framework and keep positive! Get on that plane and feel successful for doing it. Don't criticize yourself ever

